---

Web browsing mechanism simplified

---

As you are already reading this post on an online platform, you must visited a web page at least once, most probably many many more than just once, and you may have wondered "WHAT happens when I TYPE<google.com> in the browser ADDRESS BAR and press ENTER?".
The answer to that question is both extremely simple and very complicated at the same time. It is SIMPLE because it only consists of multiple mini simple steps. And COMPLICATED because of the "multiple" part; as the process is a journey between various stops, that journey is bi-directional and some parts of this journey might need to be travelled again many time depending on different parameters, till Google web page finally manifests in your browser just few milliseconds after you pressed the ENTER button in your keyboard.
So let's embark this journey together, GET READY. Once the ENTER button returns to its un-pushed position, the browser will try to auto complete what you've typed in the address bar to have a valid URL which is the full address of the content your are requesting in the internet world; just like your home address which starts with your building number going through the street, city, … till it ends with country your home is located in, or may be it ends with the planet earth if that address if an alien is trying to send you a postal mail :D So back to our track, basically the URLs is just like home addresses but for locations on the internet. So if you are using a modern web browser the auto-completed URL most probably will be translated from "google.com" to "https://www.google.com/".
Even thought the browser completed the URL for you it still doesn't know how to reach that location and get what you've requested, that because web contents are located on web servers which are identified by some sort of numerical addresses resemble telephone numbers and called IP address. So now the browser need to figure out the IP address of "www.google.com". Fortunately this can be retrieved, just as we retrieve phone numbers from phone book. And a sub-journey of I know a guy who knows a guy begins, only instead of guys who know guys, there is DNS who know a DNS who… So what is DNS? DNS (Domain Name Server) is a server which is just a special type of computers, whose main purpose to translate domain names like "www.google.com" into IP addresses, or refer to the DNS who can help accomplish that job.
Now the browser get the IP address which look like "123.45.67.11", thanks to the DNS, lets have a rest and have a little talk about internet protocols. An INTERNET PROTOCOL is a set of published rules and procedures that exist to standardize the communication between various systems and platforms regardless their differences and their underlying infrastructure. "https" at the beginning of the URL is one of the popular protocols, and it defines the form the browser request to get the content you asked for will be generated and also how the web server on the other end of our journey should respond. But before the browser can send the https request, it will initiate a connection to the server (which is a just a special computer) which has the content we are waiting for. Here comes the role of another internet protocol which is TCP/IP which will be used to initiate and control this connection to the remote server whose IP was retrieved earlier.